CI SN Official Review Manual 23th Edition I Chapter 1

Chapter 1 Answer Key
Self-Assessment Questions
1. A. The audit scope is specific to a single audit and
does not grant authority to perform an audit.
B. A request from management to perform an audit is
not sufficient because it relates to a specific audit.
C. The approved audit charter outlines
the auditor's responsibility, authority and
accountability.
D . The approved audit schedule does not grant
authority to perform an audit.

2. A. The objective of control self-assessment (CSA)
is to have business managers become more
aware of the importance of internal control
and their responsibility in terms of corporate
governance.
B. Reducing audit expenses is not a key benefit of
CSA.
C. Improved fraud detection is impo1tant but not
as impo1tant as control ownership. It is not a
principal objective of CSA.
D . CSA may give more insights to internal auditors,
allowing them to take a more consultative role;
however, this is an additional benefit, not the key
benefit.
3. A. A risk-based audit approach focuses on
understanding the nature of the business and
being able to identify and categorize risk.
Business risk impacts the long-term viability
of a specific business. Thus, an information
systems (IS) auditor using a risk-based audit
approach must be able to understand business
processes.
B. Administrative controls, while an imp01tant subset
of controls, are not the primary focus needed to
understand the business processes within the scope
of an audit.
C. Like administrative controls, environmental
controls are an important control subset; however,
they do not address high-level overarching
business processes under review.
D. Business strategies are the drivers for business
processes; however, in this case, an IS auditor is
focusing on the business processes that were put in
place to enable the organization to implement its
strategies.

28 I ©ISACA. All Rig hts Reserved.

4. A. Control risk is the risk that a material error exists
that will not be prevented or detected in a timely
manner by the system of internal controls.
B. Detection risk is the risk that a material
misstatement with a management assertion will
not be detected by an audit and assurance
professional 's substantive tests. It consists of two
components: sampling risk and non-sampling risk.
C. Inherent risk is the risk level or exposure
assessed without considering the actions that
management has taken or might take.
D. Sampling risk is the risk that incorrect
assumptions are made about the characteristics of
a population from which a sample is taken. Nonsampling risk is detection risk that is unrelated to
sampling; it can be due to a variety of reasons,
including human error.

5. A. An information systems (IS) auditor is not
expected to ignore control weaknesses just
because they are outside the scope of a current
review.
B. The conduct of a detailed systems software review
may hamper the audit's schedule, and an IS
auditor may not be technically competent to do
such a review at the time of the audit.
C. If there are control weaknesses that have
been discovered by an IS auditor, they should
be disclosed. By issuing a disclaimer, this
responsibility would be waived.
D. The appropriate option would be to review
the relevant systems software and recommend
a detailed systems software review for which
additional resources may be recommended.
6. A. Deployment of available audit resources is
determined by the audit assignments, which are
influenced by the planning process.
B. Short- and long-term issues that drive audit
planning can be heavily impacted by changes to
the risk environment, technologies and business
processes of the enterprise.
C. The audit charter reflects the mandate of top
management to the audit function and resides at
a more abstract level.
D. Applicability of information systems (IS) audit
standards, guidelines and procedures is universal
to any audit engagement and is not influenced by
short- and long-term issues.

CISA° Official Review Manual 23th Edition I Chapter 1

7. A. The objective of control self-assessment (CSA)
is to have business managers become more
aware of the importance of internal control
and their responsibility in terms of corporate
governance.
B. Reducing audit expenses is not a key benefit of
CSA.
C. Improved fraud detection is important but not
as important as control ownership. It is not a
principal objective of CSA.
D . CSA may give more insights to internal auditors,
allowing them to take a more consultative role;
however, this is an additional benefit, not the key
benefit.
8. A. The findings of a previous audit are of interest
to the auditor, but they are not the most critical
step. The most critical step involves finding the
current issues or high-risk areas, not reviewing the
resolution of older issues. A review of historical
audit findings could indicate that management is
not resolving the risk items identifi ed or that the
recommendations were ineffective.
B. Executive management is not required to approve
the audit plan. It is typically approved by the audit
committee or board of directors. Management
could recommend areas to audit.
C. Reviewing information security policies and
procedures is normally conducted during
fieldwork, not planning.

play a part in audit planning but only as it pertains
to organizational risk.
D. Sufficiency of audit evidence pertains to the
evaluation of the sufficiency of evidence obtained
to suppott conclusions and achieve specific
engagement objectives.
10.A. Preventive controls are those that avert problems
before they arise. Backup media cannot be used to
prevent damage to files and, therefore, cannot be
classified as preventive controls.
B. Management controls modify processing systems
to minimize repeat occurrences of the problem.
Backup media do not modify processing systems
and, therefore, do not fit the definition of
management controls.

C. A corrective control helps to correct or
minimize the impact of a problem. Backup
media can be used for restoring the files in
case of damage to the files, thereby reducing
the impact of a disruption.
D. Detective controls help to detect and report
problems as they occm. Backup media do not aid
in detecting errors.

D. Of all the steps listed, performing a risk
assessment is the most critical. Risk assessment
is required by ISACA IS Audit and Assurance
Standard 1201 (Risk Assessment in Planning),
statement 1201.2: "IT audit and assurance
practitioners shall identify and assess risk
relevant to the area under review when
planning individual engagements." In addition
to the standards requirement, if a risk
assessment is not performed, then high-risk
areas of the auditee systems or operations may
not be identified for evaluation.
9. A. Audit planning requires a risk-based approach.
B. Materiality pertains to potential weaknesses or
absences of controls while planning a specific
engagement, and whether such weaknesses or
absences of controls could result in a significant
deficiency or a material weakness.
C. Fraud monitoring pertains to the identification of
fraud-related transactions and patterns and may

©ISACA. All Rights Reserved. I 29

CISA" Official Review Manual 281h Edition I Chapter 1

Chapter 1 Answer Key
Case Study
1. A. Performing a survey audit of logical access
controls would occur after an IT risk assessment.
B . Revising the audit plan to focus on risk-based
auditing would occur after an IT risk assessment.

C. An IT risk assessment should be performed
first to ascertain which areas present the
greatest risk and which controls mitigate that
risk. Although narratives and process flows
have been created, the organization has not yet
assessed which controls are critical.

D. When testing a control, it is advisable to trace
from the item being controlled to the relevant
control documentation.
4. Some possible answers include:
• The IS auditor can check which account was
recently used for executing a particular system
administrator task.
• The IS auditor can check if there was a change
record for any selected system changes (e.g.,
server reboot and patching).
• The IS auditor can check the transactions to see if
they separated the incompatible duties.

D. Testing controls that the IS auditor feels are most
critical would occur after an IT risk assessment.

5. A. Previous IS audit repmts will be revisited to save
redundant work and to use as references when
doing the IS audit work.

2. A. The system administrator account being known
by everybody is most dangerous. In that case,
any user could perform any action in the
system, including accessing files and making
permission and parameter adjustments.

B. The audit charter defines the purpose,
authority and responsibility of the IS audit
activities. It also sets the foundation for
upcoming activities.

B . Infrequent password changing would present a
concern but would not be as serious as everyone
knowing the system administrator account.
C. The network administrator being given excessive
permissions would present a concern, but it would
not be as serious as everyone knowing the system
administrator account.
D. The absence of a privilege management policy
would be a concern, but it would not be as serious
as everyone knowing the system administrator
account.
3. A. When a sample is chosen from a set of control
documents, there is no way to ensure that every
change is accompanied by appropriate control
documentation.

B. When testing a control, it is advisable to
trace from the item being controlled to
the relevant control documentation. When
a sample is chosen from a set of control
documents, there is no way to ensure that
every change is accompanied by appropriate
control documentation. Accordingly, changes to
production code provide the most appropriate
basis for selecting a sample.
C. When a sample is chosen from a set of control
documents, there is no way to ensure that eve1y
change is accompanied by appropriate control
documentation.

82 I ©ISACA. All Rights Reserved.

C. Impact of employee turnover would be
addressed when negotiating follow-up activities
for respective areas ifthere is any gap to close.
D. Impact of the implementation of a new ERP
would be addressed when negotiating the followup activities for respective areas if there is any gap
to close.
6. A. The service auditor 's report cannot ensure the
discove1y of control inefficiencies.
B. Review of the contract cannot ensure the
discovery of control inefficiencies.
C. Comparing the service delive1y repo1t and
the service level agreement cannot ensure the
discovery of control inefficiencies.

D. IS audit should conduct an independent review
of the backup and batch processing. All other
choices cannot ensure the discovery of control
inefficiencies in the process.
7. A. This is not an example of inherent risk. Inherent
risk is the risk level or exposure without
considering the actions that management has taken
or might take (e.g., implementing controls).
B. This is not an example of residual risk. Residual
risk is the remaining risk after management has
implemented a risk response.

C. Control risk exists when a risk cannot be
prevented or detected on a timely basis by the
system of IS controls, which is described in this
instance.

CISA° Official Revi ew Manual 2sth Edition I Chapter 1

D. This is not an example of material risk. Material
risk is any risk large enough to threaten the overall
success of the business in a material way.
8. Possible answer: The COBIT framework can be
leveraged and adapted. Each process can be

classified as fully addressed, partially addressed and
not applicable by comparing the standard COBIT
framework to the organization's reality. Further
frameworks, standards and practices can be included
in each respective process, as COBIT guidance
suggests.

©ISACA. All Rights Reserved. I 83

CISA' Official Revi ew Manual 281h Edition I Chapter 2

Chapter 2 Answer Key
Self-Assessment Questions
1. A. A central document repository hosts a great
deal of data but not necessarily the specific
information that would be useful for monitoring
and compliance.
B. A knowledge management system provides
valuable information but generally is not used by
management for compliance purposes.

C. A dashboard provides information that
illustrates compliance with the processes,
applications and configurable elements and
keeps the enterprise on course.
D. Benchmarking provides information to help
managers adapt the enterprise promptly, according
to trends and environment.
2. A. Specifications for planned hardware purchases are
not strategic items.

B. Information systems (IS) strategic plans must
address the needs of the business and meet
future business objectives. Hardware purchases
may be outlined, but not specified, and neither
budget targets nor development projects are
appropriate choices.
C. Target dates for development projects are not
strategic items.
D. Annual budgetary targets for the IT department are
not strategic items.
3. A. Typically, the IT depattment will have short- or
long-range plans that are consistent and integrated
with the organization's plans.
B. Plans must be time- and project-oriented and
address the enterprise's broader plans toward
attaining its goals.

C. Long-range planning for the IT department
should recognize enterprise goals, technological
advances and regulatory requirements.
D. Shott-range planning for the IT department should
be integrated into the shott-range plans of the
enterprise to better enable the IT department to
be agile and responsive to needed technological
advances that align with enterprise goals and
objectives.

4. A. A data security officer's prime responsibility
is recommending and monitoring data security
policies.

90 I ©ISACA. All Rights Reserved.

B. Promoting security awareness within the
enterprise is one of the responsibilities of a data
security officer. However, it is less impo1tant
than recommending and monitoring data security
policies.
C. The IT depa1tment, not the data security officer,
is responsible for establishing procedures for
IT security policies recommended by the data
security officer.
D. The IT depa1tment, not the data security officer, is
responsible for the administration of physical and
logical access controls.
5. A. An effective enterprise risk management (ERM)
framework is not a key success factor for an
information security program.

B. Senior management's commitment provides
the basis for success in implementing an
information security program.
C. Although an effective information security
budgeting process will contribute to success,
senior management commitment is the key
element.
D. Program planning is important but will
not be sufficient without senior management
commitment.

6. A. Evaluating the activities of boards and
committees providing oversight is an important
aspect of governance and should be measured.
B. Providing strategic IT drivers is irrelevant to
evaluating IT governance performance measures.
C. Adhering to regulatory rep01ting standards
and definitions is irrelevant to evaluating IT
governance performance measures.
D. Evaluating the IT department is irrelevant to
evaluating IT governance performance measures.
7. A. The roles of security administration and change
management are incompatible functions. The level
of security administration access rights could
allow changes to go undetected.
B. Computer operations and system development is
the incorrect choice because this would make it
possible for an operator to run a program they had
amended.
C. The combination of system development
and change control would allow program
modifications to bypass change control approvals.
D. It is common for system development and

maintenance to be undertaken by the same

CISA° Official Review Manual 23th Edition I Chapter 2

person. In both, the programmer requires
access to the source code in the development
environment but should not be allowed access
in the production environment.

0. Access controls to prevent the operator from
making program modifications require a third
party to make the changes, which may not be
practical in a small enterprise.

8. A. Approval of database administration (OBA)
activities does not prevent the combination of
conflicting functions. Review of access logs and
activities is a detective control.

B. Separation of duties (SoD) will prevent the
combination of conflicting functions. This is a
preventive control, and it is the most critical
control over DBA.
C. Reviewing access logs and activities may not
reduce the risk if OBA activities are improperly
approved.
0. Reviewing the use of database tools does not
reduce the risk because this is only a detective
control and does not prevent the combination of
conflicting functions.
9. A. Origination, in conjunction with recording and
correction, does not enable the transaction to be
authorized for processing and committed within
the system of record.

B. Authorization should be separated from
all aspects of record keeping (origination,
recording and correction). Such a separation
enhances the ability to detect the recording of
unauthorized transactions.
C. Recording, in conjunction with origination and
correction, does not enable the transaction to be
authorized for processing and committed within
the system of record.
0. Correction, in conjunction with origination and
recording, does not enable the transaction to be
authorized for processing and committed within
the system of record.
10. A. Logging changes to development libraries would
not detect changes to production libraries.
B . In smaller enterprises, it generally is not
appropriate to recruit additional staff to achieve
a strict separation of duties. The IS auditor must
look at alternatives.

C. The information systems (IS) auditor should
recommend processes that detect changes to
production source and object code, such as
code comparisons, so that the changes can be
reviewed by a third party regularly. This would
be a compensating control process.

©ISACA. All Rights Reserved. I 91

CISA6 Official Review Manual 23th Edition I Chapter 2

Chapter 2 Answer Key
Case Study
1. A. IT loses sight of the enterprise direction
without explicit strategy documents, making
project selection harder and service levels
difficult to define. Overall, IT becomes
suboptimal in delivery and value realization.
B. The failure of the risk management committee
to hold regular meetings and produce good
documentation implies a lack of good risk
governance. Risk follows when setting the
business and IT objectives.
C. Although an inadequate budget for future IT
investments raises concern, this is less important
than an incomplete strategy.
D. The lack of a full-time CIO may be a concern, but
it is not as important as an incomplete strategy.
2. A. The behavior related to application programmers'
access and migration code represents a lack ofIT
policies and procedures.

B. The lack of IT policies and procedures makes
IT-related work inconsistently delivered. The
policy reflects management intentions and
norms set by the strategy. The procedures are
instrumental to day-to-day IT delivery.
C. Risk management practices do not have to
compare to peer enterprises.
D. Although the reporting structure for IT is
important, it is not as critical as IT policies and
procedures.
3. A. Not having a full-time CIO may be a concern but
is not as concerning as the information systems
manager reporting to the CFO.
B. The lack of an IT steering committee may
cause issues but is not as big a concern as the
information systems manager reporting to the
CFO.
C. The board of directors playing a major role in IT
initiatives is not a major concern.

D. The IS manager should ideally report to
the board of directors or the CEO to
provide sufficient independence. The reporting
structure that requires the IS manager to
report to the CFO is not desirable and could
compromise certain controls.

160 I ©ISACA. All Rights Reserved.

4. A. Application programmers should obtain
approval from the business owners before
accessing data. DBAs are only custodians of
the data and should provide only the access
authorized by the data owner.
B. Although this may be an issue, it is not as big a
SoD concern as the DBA approving direct-write
access.
C. The internal audit department reporting to the
CFO is not as big a SoD concern as the DBA
approving direct-write access.
D. This is not as big a SoD concern as the DBA
approving direct-write access.
5. A. This does not best mitigate tampering with data.
B. Handing program code to the librarian does not
best mitigate tampering with data.
C. The reporting structure does not mitigate data
tampering.

D. Sign-off on data contained in the financial
results by the business managers at the end
of the month would detect any significant
discrepancies that can result from the
tampering of data through inappropriate direct
access of the data gained without the approval
or knowledge of the business managers.
6. Possible answer: The CFO may act as the CIO
in a small enterprise. Having the internal control
department report to a different executive (e.g.,
HR or risk management) is better. The governance
function should exist to cany out the IT strategy
and the IT steering committee direction. SoD should
be maximized to the degree possible. Compensating
controls, such as supervisory or peer reviews, can be
applied to current controls.
7. Possible answer: An IT budgeting and investment
process should be defined and align with the Accenco
enterprise cycles (e.g., fiscal year, quarterly reviews).
The financial management process should include
budgeting activity that states its budgeting approach,
the cost structme following the chart of accounts and
the approval chain. The business case process should
be used to justify the process and persuade the board
to approve it.
8. Possible answer: In this case, the internal auditor
should seek further assurance (e.g., monitoring of
IS controls by tools, benchmarking efforts by the
procurement team, ad hoc external auditing or senior
management review from the board).

CISA° Offi cial Review Manual 2gth Edition I Chapter 3

Chapter 3 Answer Key
Self-Assessment Questions
1. A. Test data should be sanitized to prevent
sensitive data from leaking to unauthorized
persons.
B. Although it is important that the data set be
complete, the primary concern is that test data
should be sanitized to prevent sensitive data from
leaking to unauthorized persons.
C. Although it is important to encompass a
representation of the transactional data, the
primary concern is that test data should be
sanitized to prevent sensitive data from leaking to
unauthorized persons.
D. Although it is important that the data set represent
current data being processed, the primary concern
is that test data should be sanitized to prevent
sensitive data from leaking to unauthorized
persons.
2. A. Parallel testing may show that the old system is
more cost-effective than the new system, but this
is not the primary reason.
B. Unit and system testing are completed before
parallel testing.
C. Program interfaces with files are tested for errors
during system testing.
D. The purpose of parallel testing is to ensure that
the implementation of a new system will meet
user requirements.

3. A. Management should be informed immediately
to determine whether they are willing to accept
the potential material risk of not having that
preventive control in place.
B. The existence of a detective control instead of a
preventive control usually increases the risk that a
material problem may occur.
C. Often, during business process reengineering
(BPR), many nonvalue-added controls are
eliminated. This is good, unless the controls
increase the business and financial risk.
D. An IS auditor may want to monitor, or recommend
that management monitor, the new process, but
this should be done only after management has
been informed and accepts the risk of not having
the preventive control in place.
4. A. A range check is checking data that match a
predetermined range of values.

166 I ©ISACA. All Rights Reserved.

B. A check digit is a numeric value that is
calculated mathematically and appended to
data to ensure that the original data have
not been altered (e.g., an incorrect, but valid,
value substituted for the original). This control
is effective in detecting transposition and
transcription errors.
C. An availability check is programmed checking of
the data validity in accordance with predetermined
criteria.
D. In a duplicate check, new or fresh transactions are
matched to those previously entered to ensure that
they are not already in the system.
5. A. A lack of review of access controls in a financial
enterprise can have serious consequences given
the types of data and assets that can be
accessed.
B. A lack of documentation may not be as serious as
not having properly reviewed access controls.
C. It may not be possible to retrieve data from twoyear-old backup media.
D. It may be acceptable to the business to perform
database backups once a day, depending on the
volume of transactions.
6. A. A project timetable normally is not found in a
requirements document.
B. Assessing the vendor quality processes comes
after the requirements have been completed.
C. The decision to purchase a package from a
vendor comes after the requirements have been
completed.
D. The purpose of the requirements phase is
to specify the functionality of the proposed
system; therefore, an information systems (IS)
auditor would concentrate on the completeness
of the specifications.

7. A. With a purchased package, the design and
development phases of the traditional life cycle
are replaced with selection and configuration
phases. A proposal from the supplier of
packaged systems is requested and evaluated
against predefined criteria for selection, before
a decision is made to purchase the software.
After the software is purchased, it is configured
to meet the enterprise's requirements.
B. The other phases of the system development
life cycle (SDLC), such as feasibility study,

CISA" Official Review Manual 28th Edition I Chapter 3

requirements definition, implementation and
postimplementation, remain unaltered.
C. The other phases of the SDLC, such as feasibility
study, requirements definition, implementation and
postimplementation, remain unaltered.
D. In this scenario, the design and development
phases of the traditional life cycle are replaceable
with selection and configuration phases.

collaboration and creativity of development
teams.

8. A. Quality assurance (QA) has its focus on formal
aspects of software development, such as adhering
to coding standards or a specific development
methodology.
B. To fail at user specifications implies that
requirements engineering has been done to
describe the users ' demands. Otherwise, there
would not be a baseline of specifications against
which to check.
C. Project management failed to either set up
or verify controls that provide for software
or software modules under development that
adhere to those user specifications.
D. A failure to meet user specifications might show
up during user training or acceptance testing but is
not the cause.
9. A. Because the other elements do not need to change,
the integrity risk is not increased.
B. Because the other elements do not need to change,
the concurrency risk is not increased.
C. Because the other elements do not need to change,
the confidentiality risk is not increased.
D. The main change when using thin client
architecture is making the servers critical to the
operation. Therefore, the probability that one
of them fails is increased and, as a result, the
availability risk is increased.
10. A. Project documentation is generally second
to actual functionality for agile development
methodology.
B. Strict standard operating procedures would be
detrimental to a developer's ability to think
creatively and collaboratively.
C. All development methodologies require some
form of requirements definition. Agile relies on
clear requirements being defined up front.
D. Tacit knowledge (i.e., implicit knowledge gained
from experience and difficult to document) is
leveraged greatly by agile methods to increase

©ISACA All Rights Reserved. I 167

CISA° Official Review Manual 2gth Edition I Chapter 3

Chapter 3 Answer Key

numbers. This presents the most significant
risk and should be addressed.

Case Study
1. A. Unpatched database servers are located on a
screened subnet; this mitigates the risk to the
enterprise.

B. Use of WEP encryption presents the most
significant risk because WEP uses a fixed secret
key that is easy to break. Transmission of credit
cardholder information by wireless registers is
susceptible to interception and presents a very
serious risk.
C. Sending credit cardholder data over the Internet is
less of a risk because strong encryption is being
used.
D. Because the sales data being sent to the third party
are aggregate data, no cardholder information
should be included.
2. A. According to the case study, it is unclear
whether the POS registers already use two-factor
authentication. It is known that aggregate sales
data are copied onto other media as-is, without any
controls, for external distribution.
B. According to the case study, it is unclear whether
the wireless access points use MAC address
filtering. It is known that aggregate sales data
are copied onto other media as-is, without any
controls, for external distribution.
C. Compliance with the GDPR, although important,
is not the most important due to the current
operations being only in the United States, and the
potential for expansion into the EU is a long-term
vision for the enterprise.
D. It is unclear whether sales data are secure and
free of personally identifiable information, such
as credit card information and Social Security

244 I ©ISACA. All Rights Reserved.

3. A. If internal audit is part of the steering
committee, then it will have a say in the
compliance and security-related controls to be
included in production releases.
B. Ensuring database compliance is an operational
responsibility and not an audit responsibility.
C. Compatibility with existing architecture must be
a function of the database implementation project
team as a whole, which can include internal audit
and also includes operations. Therefore, it is not
the best answer choice.
D. Although it is important that the upgraded
database solution be compliant with all regulations
affecting the enterprise, such a review should not
be limited to one regulation. Therefore, it is not
the best choice of those answers provided.
4. A. Functional project specifications should be
executed by users and systems analysts, and not
by the auditor.
B. To propose to be project consultant for quality
would not bring about an essential contribution,
because quality is a formal characteristic; whereas,
in the current case, the problem is substantial
system instability.
C. The only appropriate action is additional
research, even if the apparently technical
nature of the problem renders it unlikely that
the auditor may find it alone.
D. To contact the project leader and redesign the
schedule of deliveries would not solve the
problem. Furthermore, the definition of real causes
may sensibly alter the project environment.

CISA6 Official Review Manual 28th Edition I Chapter 4

Chapter 4 Answer Key
Self-Assessment Questions
1. A. User satisfaction is the measure to ensure that an
effective information processing operation meets
user requirements.
B. Goal accomplishment evaluates the effectiveness
involved in comparing performance with
predefined goals.
C. Benchmarking provides a means of
determining the level of performance offered
by similar information processing facility (IPF)
environments.
D. Capacity and growth planning are essential due
to the importance of IT in organizations and the
constant technological change.
2. A. Mobile sites are specially designed trailers that can
be quickly transp01ted to a business location or
to an alternate site to provide a ready-conditioned
information processing facility (IPF).
B. Warm sites are partially configured, usually
with network connections and selected peripheral
equipment-such as disk drives and controllersbut without the main computer.
C. Cold sites have only the basic environment to
operate an IPF. Cold sites are ready to receive
equipment but do not offer any components at the
site before the need.
D. Hot sites are fully configured and ready to
operate within several hours or, in some cases,
even minutes.

3. A. When testing change management, the
information systems (IS) auditor should start
with system-generated information, containing
the date and time a module was last updated,
and trace from there to the documentation
authorizing the change.
B. Focusing exclusively on the accuracy of the
documentation examined does not ensure that all
changes were, in fact, documented.
C. To trace in the opposite direction would run the
risk of not detecting undocumented changes.
D. Focusing exclusively on the completeness of the
documentation examined does not ensure that all
changes were, in fact, documented.
4. A. Virtual private network (VPN) technology
allows external partners to securely participate
in the extranet using public networks as a

250 I ©ISACA. All Rights Reserved.

transport or shared private network. Because
of low cost, using public networks {Internet) as
a transport is the principal method. VPNs rely
on tunneling/encapsulation techniques, which
allow the Internet Protocol (IP) to carry a
variety of different protocols (e.g., systems
network architecture [SNA] and internetwork
packet exchange [IPX]).
B. Client-server does not address extending the
network to business partners (i.e., client-server
refers to a group of computers within an
organization connected by a communications
network where the client is the requesting machine
and the server is the supplying machine).
C. Although it may be technically possible for an
enterprise to extend its intranet using dial-up
access, it would not be practical or cost effective
to do so.
D. A network service provider may provide services
to a shared private network by providing Internet
services, but it does not extend an organization's
intranet.
5. A. The criticality classification is determined by
the role of the application system in supporting
the strategy of the organization.
B. The replacement cost of the application does not
reflect the relative value of the application to the
business.
C. Vendor supp01t is not a relevant factor for
determining the criticality classification.
D. The associated threats and vulnerabilities will be
evaluated only ifthe application is critical to the
business.
6. A. System utilities may enable unauthorized
changes to be made to data on the client-server
database. In an audit of database security,
the controls over such utilities would be the
primary concern of the information systems
(IS) auditor.
B. Application program generators are an intrinsic
part of client-server technology, and the IS auditor
would evaluate the controls over the generator's
access rights to the database rather than their
availability.
C. Security documentation should be restricted to
authorized security staff, but this is not a primary
concern.
D. Access to stored procedures is not a primary
concern.

CISN Official Review Manual 2gth Edition I Ch apter 4

7. A. Reviewing the validity of password changes
would be performed as part of substantive testing.
B. Understanding the network architecture and design
is the starting point for identifying the various
layers of information and the access architecture
across the various layers, such as client-server
applications.
C. The first step in auditing a network is
to understand the network architecture and
design. Understanding the network architecture
and design provides an overall picture of the
network and its connectivity.
D. Understanding the network architecture and design
is the starting point for identifying the various
layers of information and the access architecture
across the various layers, such as proxy servers
and firewalls.

D. RTO is the time from the disruption/declaration
of disaster during which the business can tolerate
the nonavailability ofIT facilities. If RTO is high,
slower recovery strategies that bring up IT systems
and facilities can be used.
10.A. Members of the organization's senior management
are primarily responsible for overseeing the
development of the business continuity plan
(BCP) and are accountable for the results.
B. Management is also accountable for selecting and
approving the strategies used for disaster recovery.
C. IT may be involved in declaring a disaster but is
not primarily responsible.
D. The IT department of an organization is
primarily responsible for restoring the IT
systems and data after a disaster within the
designated timeframes.

8. A. The information systems (IS) auditor should
always be present when disaster recovery plans
(DRP) are tested to ensure that the tested
recovery procedures meet the required targets
for restoration, that recovery procedures are
effective and efficient, and to report on the
results as appropriate.
B. IS auditors may be involved in overseeing plan
development, but they are unlikely to be involved
in the actual development process.
C. Similarly, an audit of plan maintenance procedures
may be conducted, but the IS auditor normally
would not have any responsibility for the actual
maintenance.
D. An IS auditor may be asked to comment upon
various elements of a supplier contract, but this is
not always the case.
9. A. Recovery point objective (RPO) is the earliest
point in time at which it is acceptable to recover
the data. In other words, RPO indicates the age
of the recovered data (i.e., how long ago the
data was backed up or otherwise replicated).
lfRPO is very low, such as minutes, it means
that the organization cannot afford to lose
even a few minutes of data. In such cases,
data mirroring (synchronous data replication)
should be used as a recovery strategy.
B. lfRPO is high, such as hours, then other backup
procedures could be used.
C. A high recovery time objective (RTO) means that
the IT system may not be needed immediately
after the disruption/declaration of disaster (i.e., it
can be recovered later).

© ISACA All Rights Reserved. I 251

CISA' Official Review Manual 29th Edition I Chapter 4

Chapter 4 Answer Key
Case Study
1. A. Lack of encryption is the most important
concern since microwave radio systems are easy
to tap.
B. Lack of scalability is important but not as
important as ensuring the confidentiality and
integrity of customer data.
C. The likelihood of a service outage is important
but not as important as ensuring the confidentiality
and integrity of customer data.
D. Cost overruns in implementation are impmtant but
not as impmtant as ensuring the confidentiality
and integrity of customer data.
2. A. Scanning for malware would not detect the use of
investigative tools designed to harvest passwords
or reveal network vulnerabilities.

B. Isolating the wireless network by placing it
on a firewalled subnet would best reduce the
likelihood of attack.
C. Logging access would not prevent a successful
attack.
D. Limiting access to normal business hours would
not prevent a successful attack.
3. A. Because not all employee job functions are critical
during a disaster, it is not necessaiy to contract the
same number of desktops at a recovery facility as
the number of employees.
B. Similarly, not every server is critical to the
continued operation of the business. Only a subset
will be required.

348 I ©ISACA. All Rights Reserved.

C. Because there is no assurance that the hot site
will not already be occupied, storing backup media
at the facility would not be advisable. These
facilities are generally not designed to provide
extensive media storage, and frequent testing by
other customers could compromise the security of
the media.

D. As equipment needs in a rapidly growing
business are subject to frequent change,
quarterly reviews are necessary to ensure that
the recovery capability keeps pace with the
organization.
4. A. Adding each branch to the hot site contract would
be far more expensive.
B. The most cost-effective solution is to

recommend that branches have sufficient
capacity to accommodate critical personnel
from another branch. Because critical job
functions would represent only perhaps 20
percent of the staff from the affected branch,
accommodations for only four to seven critical
staff members would be needed.
C. Relocating branch servers to the data center
could result in performance issues. It would not
address the question of where to locate displaced
employees.
D. Adding capacity to the hot site contract would not
provide coverage, as hot site contracts base their
pricing on each location covered.

CISA• Official Review Manual 28th Edition I Chapter 5

Chapter 5 Answer Key
Self-Assessment Questions
1. A. The most important aspect of a signature-based
intrusion detection system (IDS) is its ability
to protect against known (signature) intrusion
patterns. Such signatures are provided by
the vendor and are critical to protecting an
enterprise from outside attacks.
B. One of the key disadvantages of an IDS is its
inherent inability to scan for vulnerabilities at the
application level.
C. An IDS cannot break encrypted data packets to
identify the source of the incoming traffic.
D. A demilitarized zone (DMZ) is an internal
network segment in which systems (e.g., a web
server) accessible to the public are housed.
In order to provide the greatest security and
efficiency, an IDS should be placed behind the
firewall so that it will detect only those attacks/
intruders that enter the firewall.
2. A. Logging access to personal information is a good
control in that it will allow access to be analyzed
if there is concern over unauthorized access.
However, it will not prevent access.
B. Restricting access to sensitive transactions will
restrict access only to some of the data. It will not
prevent access to other data.

C. The server and system security should be
defined to allow.only authorized staff members
access to information about the staff whose
records they handle on a day-to-day basis.
D. Restricting system access to business hours would
only affect when unauthorized access could occur
and would not prevent such access at other times.
It is impotiant to consider that the data owner is
responsible for determining who is allowed access
via the written software access rules.
3. A. The security officer serving as the database
administrator, while a control weakness, does not
carry the same disastrous impact as the absence of
password controls.

B. The absence of password controls on the
two database servers, where production data
resides, is the most critical weakness.
C. Having no business continuity plan (BCP) for
the mainframe system's noncritical applications,
while a control weakness, does not carry the

354 I ©ISACA. All Rights Reserved.

same disastrous impact as the absence of password
controls.
D. Local area networks (LANs) not backing up
regularly, while a control weakness, does not carry
the same disastrous impact as the absence of
password controls.

4. A. If a password is disclosed when single signon (SSO) is enabled, there is a risk that
unauthorized access to all systems will be
possible.
B. User access rights should remain unchanged by
SSO, as additional security parameters might not
be implemented.
C. One of the intended benefits of SSO is the
simplification of security administration.
D. One of the intended benefits of SSO is the
unlikelihood of an increased workload.

5. A. To ensure that quality of service (QoS)
requirements is achieved, the Voice over
Internet Protocol (VoIP) service over the wide
area network should be protected from packet
losses, latency or jitter. To reach this objective,
network performance can be managed to
provide QoS and class of service support
using statistical techniques, such as traffic
engineering.
B. The standard bandwidth of an integrated services
digital network (ISDN) data link would not
provide the QoS required for corporate VoIP
services.
C. Wired equivalent privacy is an encryption scheme
related to wireless networking.
D. VoIP phones are usually connected to a corporate
local area network (LAN) and are not analog.
6. A. Benefits of cloud computing are redundancy and
the ability to access systems and data in the event
of a technical failure.

B. Considering that an insurance company
must preserve the privacy/confidentiality of
customer information, unauthorized access to
information and data leakage are the major
concerns.
C. The ability to investigate an incident is important,
but most important is addressing the risk of an
incident: the exposure of sensitive data.
D. If a cloud provider goes out of business, the data
should still be available from backups.

CISA° Official Review Manual 23th Edition I Chapter 5

7. A. A digital signature provides authentication and
integrity.
B. Tunnel mode provides encryption and
authentication of the complete (Internet
Protocol) IP package. To accomplish this, the
authentication header (AH) and encapsulating
security payload (ESP) services can be nested.
C. A digital certificate provides authentication and
integrity.
D. The transport mode provides primary protection
for the protocols' higher layers (i.e., protection
extends to the data field [payload] of an IP
package).

from being copied from a USB drive onto a
machine, which would cause the machine to
become infected.
D. Antivirus software can be used to prevent virus
attacks. Running regular scans can is useful
to detect virus infections that have already
occurred. Regular updates of the software are
required to ensure it can update, detect and
treat viruses as they emerge.

8. A. A digital signature includes an encrypted
hash total of the size of the message as it
was transmitted by its originator. This hash
would no longer be accurate if the message
were subsequently altered, indicating that the
alteration had occurred.
B. Digital signatures will not identify, prevent or
deter unauthorized reading.
C. Digital signatures will not identify, prevent or
deter theft.
D. Digital signatures will not identify, prevent or
deter unauthorized copying.
9. A. This best describes a distributed denial of
service (DDoS) attack. Such attacks are
centrally initiated and involve the use of
multiple compromised computers. The attacks
work by flooding the target site with spurious
data, thereby overwhelming the network
and other related resources. To achieve this
objective, the attacks need to be directed at a
specific target and occur simultaneously.
B. DDoS attacks are not locally initiated.
C. DDoS attacks are not initiated using a primary
computer.
D. DDoS attacks are not staggered.
10.A. Scanning email attachments on the mail server is
a preventive control. It will prevent infected email
files from being opened by the recipients, which
would cause their machines to become infected.
B. Restoring systems from clean copies is a
preventive control. It will ensure that viruses are
not introduced from infected copies or backups,
which would reinfect machines.
C. Disabling universal serial bus (USB) ports is
a preventive control. It prevents infected files

©ISACA. All Rights Reserved. I 355

CISA' Official Review Manual 2sth Edition I Chapter 5

Chapter 5 Answer Key
Case Study
1. A. On an enterprise's internal network, security
policies and controls should be in place to detect
and halt an outside attack that uses an internal
machine as a staging platform. Therefore, this
would not be the biggest concern to the IS audit.
B. Computers at the backup site are subject to the
corporate security policy and therefore are not
high-risk computers.

C. VPN offers a secure connection between
the remote PC and the corporate network.
VPN does not, however, protect the remote
PC from outside attack (such as from the
Internet). If the remote PC is compromised, a
malicious actor can use the entry point of the
compromised remote PC to enter the corporate
network (lateral movement).
D. Computers on the network that are at the
enterprise's remote offices, perhaps with IS and
security employees who have different ideas about
security, are riskier than computers in the main
office or backup site, but obviously less risky than
home computers.
2. A. The greatest degree of protection in applying
access control software against internal and
external users' unauthorized access is at the
network and platform/OS levels. These systems
are also referred to as general support systems,
and they make up the primary infrastructure
on which applications and database systems
will reside.
B. The application level is pait of the infrastructure
made up by the general support systems,
suppmted by the network and OS level.
C. The database level is pait of the infrastructure
made up by the general support systems,
suppmted by the network and OS level.
D. The log file level is pait of the infrastructure made
up by the general support systems, suppmted by
the network and OS level.
3. A. When an employee repmts a forgotten password,
the security administrator should start a password
process generation procedure only after verifying
the user 's identification using a challenge/response
system or similar procedure.

546 I ©ISACA. All Rights Reserved.

B. A challenge/response system or similar
procedure should be the first step in verifying
a user's identity. To verify, it is advised that the
security administrator should return the user's
call after verifying their extension or calling
their supervisor for verification.
C. Before an employee is provided with a default
password, the individual 's identity should be
verified using a challenge/response system or
similar procedure.
D. Before any fmther action is taken, the user 's
identity must be verified. A new password should
not be generated until it is confirmed, regardless of
the security of the terminal.
4. A. Spectertainment has a remote access policy in
place that outlines the approved methods for
remotely connecting to internal resources but does
not address the use of personal devices.
B. An acceptable use policy outlines what
employees agree to when using and accessing
organizational assets. It would confirm whether
the use of personal devices is allowed and may
also include a Bring Your Own Device (BYOD)
policy to further codify their use.
C. Change control policies are required when making
changes to IT systems. While some changes may
need to be submitted based on any changes needed
to suppo1t BYOD, it is not the most important
control.
D. Access control policies are required to ensure
employees understand how to access systems.
While changes to the access control policy may
need to be made to support BYOD, it is not the
most important control.

5. A. BYOD policies have shown increased
productivity and employee satisfaction.
B. BYOD use can make it more difficult to terminate
employee access.
C. Since employees are using their own devices,
BYOD can help organizations increase their
cost savings.
D. The use of BYOD does not indicate that
employees have increased awareness of the
security risk posed by their use of their personal
devices for work.

